# NZ-Eel-Virome-Paper

# Host and geography impact the diversity of viruses in New Zealand’s longfin and shortfin eels

Repository containing the R-code used to statistically analysis the virome alpha and beta diversity and the alignments that were generated in "Host and geography impact the diversity of viruses in New Zealand’s longfin and shortfin eels"

Stephanie J. Waller, Eimear Egan, Amber Sinton, P. Mark Lokman, Erica Williams, Edward C. Holmes, Jemma L. Geoghegan

Abstract:
Aotearoa New Zealand is home to two native freshwater eel species, each with complex catadromous lifecycles: the shortfin eel (Anguilla australis) and the longfin eel (Anguilla dieffenbachii). The longfin eel is considered one of the largest, slowest growing, and longest-lived freshwater eels in the world and is endemic to New Zealand. It is currently classified as ‘At Risk’ with declining population numbers. In contrast, the shortfin eel is not classified as threatened and, although native to New Zealand, it can also be found in Australia and several Pacific Islands. Although viruses may play a role in eel population declines around the world, little is known about the viruses present in New Zealand eel populations. Through a metatranscriptomic analysis of shortfin and longfin eels across three different sampling locations in the South Island of New Zealand we characterised eel viromes to determine whether viruses have jumped between these hosts, and if eel composition is impacted by life stage and species. We identified 9 novel viral species spanning eight different families, enhancing our understanding of the diversity of eel viruses in New Zealand and the host range of these viral families. Viruses from the Flaviviridae (genus Hepacivirus) were widespread and found in both shortfin and longfin eels, perhaps indicating a previous host jumping event or co-divergence among these viruses. Notably, both host specificity and geographic location appeared to influence eel virome composition, highlighting the complex interaction between viruses, hosts and their ecosystems. Overall, this study broadens our understanding of viromes in aquatic hosts and highlights the importance of gaining a baseline knowledge of fish viral abundance and diversity, particularly in endangered aquatic species. 
